
A music major in college, I was one of the department’s brightest stars.  I played coveted positions in the best ensembles, including the university’s Wind Ensemble.  The Wind Ensemble was directed by a regular tyrant on the podium.  He was a good conductor who insisted on preparedness and punctuality.  Anyone breaking these rules was dropped from the ensemble with no warning.  As a result, the ensemble was filled with dedicated students, all very fine musicians, and was among the two best instrumental ensembles on campus (rivaled only by the jazz band).

I was in the habit of carrying all of my belongings with me from rehearsal to rehearsal: books, keys (on which I had a container of mace), music, flute and piccolo, metronome, etc.

On one particular day, I had a rehearsal with another group just before Wind Ensemble.  The first rehearsal went over-time, and I had only a minute to spare before the Wind Ensemble conductor entered our rehearsal hall, slamming a locked door behind him.  If you were one of his musicians and wanted to stay that way, you were in your chair, ready to play when that door shut.

Flute in hand, I raced into our rehearsal hall. And in true diva fashion, I dumped all of my belongings on the floor at the end of the flute section.  I pulled my keys out of my pocket and dramatically threw them by my pile of belongings.

Within a few seconds, the piccoloist, third-, and second-chair flutes and third-chair clarinets began coughing.  Our conductor entered the hall, slamming the door behind him.  Then the French horns and lower trumpets began coughing.  The conductor raised his baton and said, “D flat major scale,” cough hack cough, “dotted-eighth, sixteenth,” cough COUGH cough.

He covered his mouth as he coughed and gave us the down beat.  At this point, the rest of the flutes, clarinets, and trumpets were coughing and trying to play at the same time, resulting in a chorus of D flat major and dry hacking.  In mere seconds, the rest of the ensemble was coughing, too: oboes, bassoons, the string bassist, the tubas and euphoniums.

“Stop it.”

The conductor dropped his arms and issued his first, and we knew only, warning.  “No more coughing or you’ll be thrown out.”  Red-faced and teary-eyed, not another cough was heard from the musicians, although our conductor managed to let out a few hacks after making the ultimatum.

When the rehearsal was over, I took my time putting away my flute and repacking my back pack.  The last thing I picked up was my set of keys.  That’s when I noticed it – the safety lock on the mace was off.  I immediately realized what happened: I had maced the university Wind Ensemble when I threw the keys on the floor, among my belongings.

The fear of being thrown out of the Wind Ensemble was so great that I never told anyone about it while I was in school, not my best friends, not my parents, no one.  All these years later when I talk with school buddies, I still can’t bring it up.  I manage to eek out a smile thinking about it, though.